#### Overview

This project involves the comprehensive task of analyzing HR Analytics data from Kaggle. The data contains 38 columns that describe a wide variety of information about employee patterns that either result in attrition or not. Attrition is high in the workplace so the majority of columns from the dataset are categorized as 0 for resulting in attrition. For the purposes of this study and balancing the data, Attrition was chosen as a measure of impact as the target variable. Gender and Marital Status were also used as target variables for classification studies. Marital Status was a multi-class study with three object types instead of two. An unbalanced study of attrition was also implemented as a target variable. Linear regressions were run for the numeric variables with years in current role and monthly income used as independent variables. 

#### Business Objective

A HR Tech company has hired me as a Data Scientist to analyze this data in an effort to better understand what factors are impacting Attrition levels. Attrition is high in the modern workplace so it is essential for organizations to gain a stronger understanding of what is driving this trend for their specific organization. I've been tasked with identifying the variables that are influencing Attrition patterns. Certain target variables of interest are Attrition itself, Gender, and Monthly Income for a Linear Regression. Gender is a binary variable from this dataset that can be informative to the breakdown between Males and Females when it comes to Attrition levels. Attrition is also a binary variable that is a strong target variable because all other variables are going to be informative of the direct impact on Attrition levels. Attrition was both an unbalanced and balanced study. Monthly Income was also used as a target variable for a Linear Regression study to present what numeric dependent variables are statistically significant. The HR Tech Company is looking for metrics that demonstrate a strong relationship between the target variable and selected predictive varibles. 

#### Data Understanding and Analysis

The first step of the analysis was to indentify a target variable. Attrition was selected because it is a binary variable that is associated with driving revenue in the workplace. It was also able to be balanced, however, the number of variables was less than 1000. Some of the predictive variables that were used were Age, BusinessTravel, DailyRate, Education, Environment Satisfaction, PerformanceRating, and Relationship Satisfaction. The target variable needed to be One Hot Encoded because it was an object type categorized as Attrition or no Attrition. One Hot Encoding converted this to 1 for Attrition and 0 for no Attrition. Then the data was balanced so the number of observations for both Attrition categories was even. 

A train test set was then completed and then the data needed to be One Hot Encoded. This was completed for both the train and test datasets. 

The baseline model for this project is a Random Forest Classifier. Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and an F1 Score were all generated from this model. The scores varied. The Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1 Scores were all high for the not having attrition category and were at 0 for the attrition category since the data is unbalanced. The distribution is 84% not having Attrition and 16% having attrition. ROC curves were generated for the train and test data. The train data had a value of 0.95 and the test data had a roc value of 0.52. There is probably overfitting for this data set so cross validation was implemented. With cross validation the ROC curve for the test data value increased to 0.71.

Three other additional models were added that were Logistic Regression, Decision Tree Classifer, and Mulitnomial. Classification Reports were generated for these three models. The results for one of the three models was lower and the other two models have strong scores. The scores were skewed toward the non attrition category because the data is unbalanced in it's original form. Cross Validation was implemented for all three models and the scores for the Logistic Regression test data improved for a mean accuracy of 85%. The mean precision score also increased to 68%. The cross validation for the Decision Tree Classifer aand Mulinomial models didn't result in sigificant changes. 

A balanced study was also conducted for Attriton to gain some comparison. The distribution for this study was 50% for both categories of Attrition. One setback is that there is less data for the balanced study since the original data was highly unbalanced. The total number of observations for the balanced dataset for Attrition was 476. This was generated by taking the lower attrition category value of 238 and assiging that to the non attrition category that had a much higher number of 1242. Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and an F1 Score were all generated from this model. The scores were much stronger compared to the unbalanced study. The train data had a Accuracy of 0.94. Precision, Recall, and the f1 Score were all above 0.92 for both not having and having attrition categories. Since this data is balanced it makes perfect sense to be getting these results. The test data had lower results, however, still stronger than the unbalanced data. The accuracy was 0.55. The Precision, Recall, and f1 Scores varied but were all below 0.70. Cross validation was implemented and brought all of these scores above 0.75 including a mean Precision of 0.92 and a mean Roc acccuracy of 0.92. The original ROC value was 0.57.

Three other additional models were added that were Logistic Regression, Decision Tree Classifier, and Multinomial. Classification reports were generated for these three models. The results for two of the three models were lower than the original Random Forest Classifier Model. The Logistic Regression Model had a accuracy score of 0.63 and the Multinomial Model had a accuracy score of 0.5. Cross Validation was implemented for the Logistic Regression Model and the mean accuracy score increased to 0.72. All other scores were above 0.70 with this cross validation. Cross Validation was also implemented for The Multinomial Model and the mean accuracy score increased to 0.82 for the train data. The test data remained low around 0.50. The Decision Tree Classifier didn't need cross validation since the accuracy score and all other scores were at or near perfect at 1.0.  

This process was also implemented for Gender and Marital Status as target variables. These were additional studies that were implmented to further explore the data, however, are not central to the purpose of this study. 

Multiclass Classification was also implemented for Marital Status. Marital Status had high precision, recall, and f1-scores for the Single and Married categories. The Single status had the highest scores all above 0.70 with the highest being a precision of 0.99. Married had all metric values above 0.6. The divered status had values below 0.5. 

The final study was a Multi-Linear Regression model. For this model a diffent target variable was selected since this is a numeric study. The target variable is the YearsInCurrentRole. The predictive variables that were found to have statistical significance at the 1% level are years in current role and monthly rate for the Mulit-Linear Regression. Another target variable was implemented for Monthly Income. The predictive variables that were found to have statistical signficance at the 1% level for this regression were TotalWorkingYears. The constant was significant at the 1% level. 

For a standard Linear Regression for YearsInCurrentRole: YearsAtCompany, YearsSinceLastPromotion, YearsInCurrentRole, TotalWorkingYears, and Monthly Income is sigificant at the 1% level. For a standard  Linear Regression for MonthlyIncome: YearsAtCompany, YearsSinceLastPromotion, TotalWorkingYears, and YearsInCurrentRole is significant at the 1% level. 

#### Vizualizations

Vizulations were created for the distribution of data across categories for the target variables of Attrition and Gender. Classification reports were generated for 4 different models including cross validation for the train and test data. Confusion Matrix were implemented for hyperparameters with more interations and higher tolerance. Roc Curves were generated for all classification studies. Linear Regressions were also implemented.


#### Recommendations 

There are a few different recommendations based on these findings and the recommendations depend on the target variables of each study. For Attrition the strongest model was the Random Forest Regressor. It's promising to find that at least one of the models has strong metrics across the board before cross validation. The model for the balanced Attrition study was even stronger with high metrics for both categories. However, there were less observations than the Unbalanced study. Still, it would be beneficial to focus on the balanced Attrition study and dataset to determine how to keep Attrition levels low. Keeping attrition levels low will result in higher revenue for the company. 

The scores for Gender were high for the Random Forest Regressor so that could be a starting point to understand how Gender is influencing Attrition rates. Marital Status had high scores for the multi-class study for the Married and Single categories. You could narrow down the data filtering for these categories to gain a better understanding of how these categories are influencing Attrition.

For Linear Regressions, Monthly Income is significant at the 5% level as the constant and Total Working Years is signficant at the 1% level. You can filter the data to prioritize Total Working Years as a measure for what is influencing Attrition rates. The other variables that were found to be significant at the 1% level could also be filtered to better understand how those variables are influencing Attrition. 

Attrition is a central topic in the modern workplace. The attrition rates are high and companies lose significant amounts of revenue from turnonver. The findings from this study would be very helpful for companies that would like to understand what is influencing these high levels of Attrition at their organizations. Narrowing down the findings that are statstically signficant or have high metric values for the models generated is a good place to start. The ultimate goal would be to retain more employees and increase revenue. 
